Absalom quickly organized
a full-scale conspiracy for the throne.
He forced his own father,
King David, to flee for his life.
While David was traveling through Bahurim,
Shimei began walking along a mountainside.
Ugh!
You bloodguilty man!
Why should this dead dog,
Shimei, curse my lord the king?
Let me go over, please,
and take off his head.
What happened next, Nathan?
Well,
David wasn’t so quick to act.
Leave him alone!
Perhaps Jehovah will see my affliction
and will restore goodness to me.
Mephibosheth
—his grandfather had tried to kill David.
When David became king
and asked Mephibosheth to the palace,
he must have wondered why.
Here is your servant.
Mephibosheth,
do not be afraid,
for I will certainly show loyal love to you
for the sake of your father Jonathan,
and I will return to you all
of the land of Saul your grandfather.
And you will always dine at my table.
What is your servant,
that you have turned your attention
to a dead dog like me?
Come.
David, Saul, and their army
returned from striking down the Philistines.
The women of all the cities of Israel
greeted them with a celebration
of song and dance.
The women began singing,
“Saul has struck down his thousands,
and David his tens of thousands.”
The only thing left to give him
is the kingship!
From that day on,
Saul was always suspicious of David.
Jealousy controlled Saul
and ruined his friendship with David
and with Jehovah.
David was popular, good-looking,
physically strong, a talented musician,
and he had been anointed as the next king.
Here is my eldest daughter, Merab.
And I will give her to you as a wife.
Who am I to be son-in-law to the king?
Other men would have used this opportunity
to boast or to promote themselves.
Some just couldn’t understand
why David wouldn’t take more credit.
David,
you’re the finest warrior we’ve ever had.
Haven’t you earned the right
to accept some praise?
But who really trains me for battle?
Who rescues me from the sword?
Jehovah is my Rock; he should be praised.
What is any man next to him?
David was sick.
Absalom saw this
as an opportunity to seize power.
Like his father David,
he had many gifts.
He was born into a wealthy
and powerful family.
He turned heads wherever he went,
and he relished the attention.
Men would come to the city gate
so that the king would hear their legal case.
If I were appointed judge in the land,
every man with a legal case
or judgment could come to me
and I would see that he receives justice.
You are from the royal house, my lord.
My mother too has royal blood.
It seems that I was born to lead.
But God will do what’s best for his people.
Absalom seemed
to be interested in the people
who came to David,
but he was only interested in himself.
The ark of the covenant
was finally brought to Jerusalem.
David and the people danced and celebrated.
Has he forgotten that he is king,
dancing like a common fool?
How glorious the king of Israel made himself
before the eyes of the slave girls
of his servants,
just as an empty-headed man!
My celebration was before Jehovah.
Michal did not love others
as much as she loved herself.
David was faithful to Jehovah for decades.
But then he let his guard down,
and he coveted a married woman.
Bring Bath-sheba to me.
David and Bath-sheba committed adultery,
and she became pregnant.
To hide their sin,
David secretly ordered
Bath-sheba’s husband to be killed.
And he hurt the God
who had done so much for him.
On the run from Saul,
David’s men came to see Nabal,
whose sheep they had protected.
They asked only for what Nabal could spare.
David didn’t wait to react.
Everyone strap on your sword!
David took action,
but he didn’t seek Jehovah’s direction.
Still, Jehovah intervened
through Nabal’s discerning wife, Abigail.
My lord, let the blame be on me.
It is Jehovah who has held you back
from incurring bloodguilt
and from taking revenge.
You will have no regret in your heart.
Nabal was senseless,
but he was still David’s Israelite brother,
and he deserved to be treated lovingly.
David had become provoked, and Abigail
rescued him from making
the situation much worse.
Praise Jehovah the God of Israel,
who has sent you this day to meet me.
The Amalekites kidnapped
the wives and children of David and his men.
And his men became very bitter.
You!
Our families were never safe here.
You led them to their death!
“Life for life,” David—you should be stoned!
Patience, patience, please
—Jehovah may yet rescue them.
We don’t know.
David looked to Jehovah for help.
David fought the Amalekites,
rescued all of the kidnapped Israelites,
and recovered all of the flocks
that had been taken.
Jehovah protected us
and gave into our hand the marauder band
that came against us.
David could have given the spoils of war
only to those who trusted in him,
but he shared with all.
It was as though they had never wronged him.
I’ve escaped from the camp of Israel.
Many have fallen and died.
Even Saul and his son Jonathan have died.
How do you know?
I stood above him and put him to death.
Teach all of our people this dirge
for Saul and Jonathan:
“Saul and Jonathan,
“beloved and cherished during their life.
“How the mighty have fallen
and the weapons of war have perished!”
Not once did David
mention Saul’s hurtful acts.
To David, the assassination of Saul
was an unrighteous act,
and David could never rejoice over that.
Here I’m dwelling in a house of cedars
while the ark of the covenant
of Jehovah is under tent cloths.
Do whatever is in your heart,
for the true God is with you.
But I had spoken too quickly.
David.
Nathan.
Go on, Nathan.
What is it?
This is what Jehovah says:
‘You are not the one
who will build me a house to dwell in.’
David’s son Solomon would build the temple.
But David didn’t feel sorry for himself,
and he didn’t try to push ahead
without Jehovah’s blessing.
David knew God’s will, and he rejoiced in it.
Later, he gathered
a vast amount of materials
so his son could build.
David had been pursued ruthlessly by Saul.
He and his men faced hunger, fear,
and threat of death.
It’s Saul!
Today, God has surrendered
your enemy into your hand.
Let me pin him to the ground.
David could have ended his trial
then and there,
but he was a man of love.
Do not harm him.
It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint
that I should lift my hand
against the anointed of Jehovah.
Despite all that Saul had done,
David left the judging to Jehovah,
whom he loved and trusted.
David was on the run from Saul.
His friend Jonathan,
Saul’s son, hatched a plan to protect David.
But could David really believe Jonathan?
After all,
Jonathan was second in line to the throne.
Only David seemed to stand in his way.
Saul had betrayed David.
Might Jonathan do the same?
Could David put his life in Jonathan’s hands?
May Jehovah do that to Jonathan
and more if I do not disclose it to you
and send you away in peace.
And I swear never to withdraw
loyal love from you and your household.
May Jehovah be between us forever.
David loved Jonathan, and he believed him.
That trust saved David’s life.
Abner had been chief of Saul’s army.
He pursued David in the wilderness
and supported David’s rival
after David became king.
So why was Abner coming to see David?
My lord the king,
make a covenant with us.
We now support you as king
because Jehovah has promised us
salvation by means of your hand.
I will make a covenant with you.
Thank you.
David trusted Abner
and hoped that he would now remain loyal.
But Joab saw things differently.
What have you done?
You know Abner!
He came here to fool you
and to get to know your every move
and find out everything that you’re doing!
Be careful.
You know the law:
‘You must not hold a grudge,
‘and you must love your
fellow man as yourself.’
Joab’s distrust grew into vengeance.
He later killed Abner.
Those who hate expect the worst,
but those who love never lose hope.
When Jehovah chose David to be king,
he had already rejected Saul.
Even so, it wasn’t yet Jehovah’s time
for David to begin ruling.
Waiting wasn’t always easy for David.
He became a fugitive running for his life.
Even his own men once threatened to kill him!
Twenty-two years had passed.
Finally, he became king over all of Israel.
True, King Saul and even some
of David’s friends abandoned him,
but David endured it all.
Jehovah had never abandoned David,
so how could David ever give up
his love for Jehovah?
When David was anointed as king,
he couldn’t have imagined the tests
that would come his way.
But love helped him to face all of them.
David saw that without love,
we become jealous,
get puffed up,
behave indecently,
look for our own interests,
and become provoked.
Love helped David to be patient,
to be kind,
not to brag,
not to keep account of the injury,
and not to rejoice over unrighteousness.
Instead, love helped him
to rejoice with the truth,
to bear all things,
to believe all things,
to hope all things,
and to endure all things.
David faced many trials.
But love was equal to all of them.
When David comes back to life,
he, like love itself,
can live on forever.